Hybrid parallelization with MPI and OpenMP
===================================================

MATLAB is used as a reference solver to compare against, but it is not necessary.

Introduction
------------

This tutorial shows how to use the ODAT-SE framework with solvers that can be parallelized in a hybrid fashion using both MPI and OpenMP.

Preparation
~~~~~~~~~~~

For control over thread-based parallelization, the package ``threadpoolctl`` is required to run this tutorial. If it is not installed, it can be installed using the following command:

.. code-block::

    $ python3 -m pip install threadpoolctl

For this tutorial, files can be located in ``sample/parallel_solver`` relative to the repository root. The main script is named ``parallel_solver.py``.


Structure of ODAT-SE Parallelization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The workflow of ODAT-SE can be decomposed into two stages: first, a search algorithm is used to find candidate points in a state space. Then, a solver is used to evaluate the cost function at the candidate points. ODAT-SE supports two levels of parallelization: algorithm-level parallelization and solver-level parallelization, and both can be used simultaneously.

ODAT-SE accepts arguments for the number of processes for search algorithms and solvers, and the number of threads for each solver process. These arguments are passed to the solver through the ``info`` object. For example, consider the following command:

.. code:: bash

    mpirun -np 6 python3 ./src/odatse_main.py input.toml --init --nalg=3 --nsolve=2 --nthreads=2

This command will run ODAT-SE with 3 algorithm processes and 2 solver processes, each with 2 threads. The total number of MPI ranks is 6, which is the product of the number of algorithm processes and the number of solver processes. Each of the 6 processes uses 2 threads for computation in the solver step. 

When ODAT-SE is run under MPI parallelization, the global communicator is split into ``nalg`` solver subcommunicators (``solcomm``), each with ``nsolve`` processes. One process in each subcommunicator is chosen to be the controller responsible for participating in the parallelization of the search algorithm. The chosen processes form the algorithm subcommunicator (``algcomm``). Note that the controller process is the one with the lowest rank in each subcommunicator, so rank 0 is always included in the algorithm subcommunicator.

ODAT-SE provides the ``odatse.mpi`` module, which provides the following functions:

- ``odatse.mpi.comm()``: returns the global communicator
- ``odatse.mpi.size()``: returns the size of the global communicator
- ``odatse.mpi.rank()``: returns the rank of the current process in the global communicator
- ``odatse.mpi.color()``: returns the color (solver subcommunicator ID) of the current process in the global communicator
- ``odatse.mpi.solcomm()``: returns the solver subcommunicator
- ``odatse.mpi.solsize()``: returns the size of the solver subcommunicator
- ``odatse.mpi.solrank()``: returns the rank of the current process in the solver subcommunicator
- ``odatse.mpi.algcomm()``: if the current process is in the algorithm subcommunicator, it returns the algorithm subcommunicator, otherwise it returns ``None``
- ``odatse.mpi.algsize()``: if the current process is in the algorithm subcommunicator, it returns the size of the algorithm subcommunicator, otherwise it returns ``None``
- ``odatse.mpi.algrank()``: if the current process is in the algorithm subcommunicator, it returns the rank of the current process in the algorithm subcommunicator, otherwise it returns ``None``

When the candidate points are generated by the search algorithm, they are broadcast to the other processes in each solver group, and all solver processes work together to evaluate the cost function at the candidate points. The results are then reduced within each group and sent to the controller process, and the search algorithm is updated.

To accomplish the desired synchronicity between controller processes and solver processes, a master-worker structure is used. The controller process executes the algorithm's ``prepare()``, ``run()``, and ``post()`` methods as normal, whereas the worker processes only execute ``worker_loop()``. The default implementation of the ``worker_loop()`` method is as follows:

.. code:: python

    def worker_loop(self) -> None:
        while True:
            msg = odatse.mpi.solcomm().bcast(None, root=0)
            if msg is None:
                break
            x, arg = msg
            self.evaluate(x, arg)

In the default implementation, the loop immediately blocks on the broadcast while waiting for data from the controller (which has ``solrank == 0``). The received data is forwarded to the solver's ``evaluate`` method so that the worker participates in the same computation as the controller. The user must implement the ``evaluate`` method such that the controller broadcasts some data to the worker processes. Note that the controller process also participates in the solver-level parallelization.

After the evaluation of all candidate points is completed (including reduction of the result to the controller), the controller sends the sentinel value ``None`` to the worker processes, and the loop exits. Then, the next set of points is determined and the process repeats.

Custom Solver Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In what follows, we demonstrate how to create a simple solver that can be parallelized in a hybrid fashion using both MPI (process-based parallelism) and OpenMP (thread-based parallelism).

.. code:: python

	import sys, os, time, argparse
        import numpy as np
        from mpi4py import MPI
        import odatse
        from odatse.algorithm import choose_algorithm
        import threadpoolctl

        class ParallelSolver(odatse.solver.SolverBase):
        def __init__(self, info, **kwargs):
                super().__init__(info)

                self.opt_x = None
                self.opt_fx = np.inf

                self.nmats=kwargs["nmats"]
                self.matsize=kwargs["matsize"]

                if odatse.mpi.rank()==0:
                        print(f"nalg: {odatse.mpi.algsize()}")
                        print(f"nsolve: {odatse.mpi.solsize()}")
                        print(f"nthreads: {odatse.mpi.solthreads()}")
                odatse.mpi.comm().barrier()

        def _testfunc(self, mats):
                with threadpoolctl.threadpool_limits(limits=odatse.mpi.solthreads()):
                        return np.sum([np.max(np.linalg.svd(mat, compute_uv=False)) for mat in mats])

        def _compute(self, seeds): # called by all solcomm ranks after broadcast
                results = []
                for seed in seeds:
                        prng = np.random.default_rng(seed=int(seed))
                        mats = [prng.random(size=(self.matsize, self.matsize)) for _ in range(self.nmats)]
                        mats = np.array_split(mats, odatse.mpi.solsize())[odatse.mpi.solrank()]
                        results.append(self._testfunc(mats))
                        odatse.mpi.solcomm().barrier()
                        results = odatse.mpi.solcomm().allreduce(np.asarray(results), op=MPI.SUM)
                        results /= self.nmats
                return results

        def evaluate(self, xs, args): # only called by algcomm ranks (solrank==0)
                seeds = xs.astype(int)

                if odatse.mpi.solrank() == 0:
                        odatse.mpi.solcomm().bcast((seeds, args), root=0) # wake up workers in this solcomm
                        print(f"color {odatse.mpi.color()}, seeds: {list(seeds)}")

                results = self._compute(seeds) # algcomm rank also calls compute

                if odatse.mpi.solrank() == 0:
                        print(f"color {odatse.mpi.color()}, results: {list(results)}")
                
                best_x = np.argmin(results)
                best_fx = results[best_x]
                if best_fx < self.opt_fx:
                        self.opt_x = xs[best_x]
                        self.opt_fx = best_fx
                return results

The cost function is computed in the ``evaluate`` function. The input file ``input.toml`` contains the following snippet:

.. code:: toml

        [algorithm]
        name = "mapper"

        [algorithm.param]
        max_list = [20]
        min_list = [1]
        num_list = [20]

In this tutorial, we consider a toy problem of finding an RNG seed that minimizes the average maximum singular value of a given number of randomly-generated matrices with a given size. Here, ``nmats`` and ``matsize`` are the number of matrices and the size of each matrix, respectively, and they are set to 50 and 1000.

From the input file, the algorithm is set to ``mapper`` and the parameter space is the set of integers from 1 to 20. First, since the algorithm is ``mapper``, ODAT-SE will decompose the parameter space into ``nalg`` parts. Each subdomain is assigned to each solver group controller. In the function ``_compute``, each controller then broadcasts the candidate seeds to the solver processes in its group. For each seed, the controller generates ``nmats`` random matrices and broadcasts the data to other solver processes in the group, who then take their share of the matrices. Then, ``_testfunction`` is called by each solver process. This function computes the SVD of each matrix and returns the sum of the largest singular values. It is constrained to run with ``nthreads`` threads using the library ``threadpoolctl``. The results are then reduced via summation within each group and sent to the controller process, then the average is computed, and finally, the search algorithm is updated.

To verify that the parallelization works as expected, we can run the script with the following command (here, 6 MPI processes are spawned, the algorithm is parallelized over 3 processes, and the solver is parallelized over 2 processes with 2 threads each):

.. code:: bash

        mpiexec -np 6 python3 parallel_solver.py -m 3 -n 2 -t 2

When viewing the process activity (using ``top`` or similar OS-dependent software), we should observe that there are 6 ``python`` processes running, with each process running at 2 * 100% = 200% CPU usage.